Hi, I'm Johannes Fortmann
from the Cloud FileProvider
team.
Today we will talk about how
to use the new FileProvider API
introduced in iOS 16 to bring
desktop class sync to iOS.
After the introduction,
we'll do a quick recap
of the aims of a file provider.
We will discuss
the optimal approach
for architecting your app,
as well as best practices
that become especially
important on iOS.
Last, I'll show you a quick demo
of a provider running on iOS.
Big Sur introduced
a declarative API
for syncing files to your Mac.
This API has been adopted
by many cloud vendors
to great success.
My team has been steadily
working on improving the API,
and we're excited to also
make it available on iOS 16.
This API will enable your iOS
apps to provide what we call
"desktop class sync."
What do I mean by that?
As apps on iOS
get more powerful,
it becomes important for them
to be able to access a shared
location on the file system.
People want these powerful apps
to be able to access
all types of file system
objects.
If they choose, their app should
be able to access folders
and create new files.
We want all of this to happen
while guaranteeing consistency.
What does consistency mean?
On iOS, background runtime
has historically been limited
because of power concerns.
At the same time,
changes are expected to be
uploaded in the background.
The modern FileProvider API
was introduced
to solve this problem.
At a basic level,
you implement an app extension
that is responsible
for enumerating items,
fetching and uploading contents,
and updating the list of items
if they change remotely.
The system is responsible
for exposing the information
you provide and
for maintaining consistency.
An important task of the system
is to keep track of errors
and retry if necessary.
For some operations,
such as fetching contents,
retries come naturally.
The user is actively waiting
for their download
and probably monitoring
the progress bar closely.
Uploads, on the other hand,
require scheduling.
By tracking the state
of the items on disk,
the system ensures that the
updated contents get uploaded.
Progress and errors are tracked
to retry the upload
if necessary.
Another complex topic
is consistency during uploads.
The system manages clones
of the file contents
to ensure that during an upload
subsequent accesses to the file
succeed and show
the correct data.
During these operations,
the system also ensures
that the local version
stays consistent,
even with multiple apps
accessing it,
and that includes sync downs
from the remote server.
This is implemented
transparently to you
using APFS features
and file coordination.
Storage limits are an important
constraint on mobile devices.
The system uses an APFS feature
to atomically track
the change state of local files.
This allows it
to transparently evict files
that don't have local changes
based on disk usage
and least recently used status.
Files that are fully uploaded
do not count against your app
in the Storage Management pane
in Settings.
You may have noticed
that so far
we have talked about the system
and the extension.
Let's talk about
where your app comes in.
I recommend that you employ
a strict separation of concerns.
The system is responsible for
managing the structures on-disk
and scheduling tasks.
Your extension is responsible
for performing those tasks
to sync up and down.
The system tracks all state
about the file hierarchy
and which parts require sync.
That means that your extension
can be very lightweight.
It does not have to track
any item-specific state at all.
Your application is not
responsible for any syncing.
Ideally, it doesn't have
to talk to the server at all.
Instead, it interacts
with your extension
through two mechanisms.
It can interact
with the extension indirectly,
the same way that any other
application on the system does.
There is API to fetch the file
URL of any managed item,
including the root.
These locations
are then accessible
using the regular
file system APIs.
Alternatively, your app
can request a direct
XPC service connection
to your extension.
This is particularly useful
to handle tasks
that cannot be expressed
as file system manipulations,
such as sharing files
or resolving conflicts.
Both of these mechanisms
can also be used
by FileProvider UI extensions
to provide an additional
integration point
in the Files app.
I would like to touch
on three points
that become especially important
with stateless providers.
First, let's talk about uploads.
As I mentioned earlier,
the system keeps track
of uploads
and will grant your extension
time to perform the upload.
An important consequence
of this is that you must
keep the system aware that your
upload is actually progressing
by reporting progress.
If an upload task doesn't
progress, it will be cancelled.
The system provides
a grace period to wind down
the upload cleanly, but if
the cancellation takes too long
your extension
will be terminated.
Let's check out the code.
To implement
a cancellation handler,
simply set it
on the progress return
from the task-specific method.
In case of uploads,
that's modifyItem.
In your handler,
you cancel the actual
upload work you were performing.
Of course, you'll also need
to call the completion handler
to signal that
a cancellation error occurred.
The code example here uses
an async task cancellation
to make this convenient,
but you could also call
the completion handler manually.
Next up, let's talk about
the sync down path.
When the user interacts
with their files,
your main app
will not be running
to receive changes
from your server.
To still inform the system
about remote changes,
you should implement
push notifications.
PushKit exposes
a specific push type
for file providers.
You can register
for these pushes
right from your extension.
On your server, you send pushes
with a well-defined payload.
The system will receive the push
and refresh the current state
if appropriate.
As with the other types
of tasks,
the system may delay
the actual refresh
depending on the situation,
like battery state
or whether the user is currently
looking at their files.
This last thing
is just something
I would like to call
your attention to:
the system manages
the folder hierarchy
that your extension reports.
This allows it to vend
the entire folder hierarchy.
Your extension doesn't have
to do anything extra here.
This is enabled by default
for modern file providers.
Let's have a quick demonstration
of what kind of workflows
that last feature enables.
I've set up my device
with this session's sample code.
We have ported
our sample code to iOS.
We built an iOS app to handle
logging into our server
but the extension
is mostly unchanged
from the macOS version.
I'm running the sample code
on my iPad right now.
I've got Files running
on the right side
and it's already
synced my files.
I've also written an app
that takes advantage
of folder selection.
My app applies a sepia filter
to all images in a folder.
This type of application
benefits from folder access
because it can operate
on all items in the folder
without forcing an interaction
for each individual item.
With desktop class sync,
I can simply drag a folder
from the Files app
into my batch editor.
Let me pull up
the folder and files
so that we can
monitor the progress.
I then push the button
and all my photos
get downloaded and modified.
After modification,
they are automatically uploaded.
The upload progress
reported by the extension
is surfaced to the user
at the bottom of the Files app
to keep them in the loop.
Let's say I wanted to implement
something like this with my app.
First, let's implement
dragging an item.
To allow initiating a drag,
you implement
the onDrag method.
The method will return
an NSItemProvider.
You register
a file representation
on the itemProvider
with the type of file
you will be dragging.
In our case, that's a folder.
Use the getUserVisibleURL method
to fetch the URL.
On the receiving side,
implement onDrop
to mark a view
as the drop target.
You can then load the file URL
from the appropriate
item provider.
Note that this
is going to be a file
that lives outside your sandbox.
For your app to access it,
it will have to consume
and release the security scope
of the URL.
What are your next steps?
We've updated the sample code
to include an iOS app.
Download it and experiment
with setting up
a simple stateless provider.
If you're starting from scratch,
be sure to use the updated
Xcode template.
It includes a basic frame
to get you started.
To learn more
about file providers
and how to implement them,
refer to
"Sync files to the cloud
with FileProvider on macOS"
from WWDC21.
Thank you for watching.
I'm excited to use
your performant
and reliable providers
on iOS devices.